Game Theory Definitions

Game theory is the process of modeling the strategic interaction between
two or more players in a situation containing a set of rules and
outcomes. While used in a number of disciplines, game theory is most
notably used as a tool within the study of economics. The economic
application of game theory can be a valuable tool to aid in the
fundamental analysis of industries, sectors, and any strategic
interaction between two or more firms. Any time we have a situation with
two or more players that involves known payouts or quantifiable
consequences, we can use game theory to help us determine the most
likely outcomes. Let\'s start out by defining a few terms commonly used
in the study of game theory:

-   **Game**: Any set of circumstances that has a result that is
    dependent on the actions of two of more decision-makers(players).

-   **Players**: A strategic decision-maker within the context of the
    game.

-   **Strategy**: A complete plan of action a player devise, given the
    set of circumstances that might arise within the game.

-   **Payoff**: The payout a player receives from arriving at a
    particular outcome. The payout can be in any quantifiable form, from
    dollars to utility.

-   **Information set**: The information available at a given point in
    the game. The term "information set" is most usually applied when
    the game has a sequential component.

-   **Equilibrium**: The point in a game where both players have made
    their decisions and an outcome is reached.

Assumptions in Game Theory

As with any concept in economics, there is the assumption of
rationality. There is also an assumption of maximization. It is assumed
that players in the game are rational and will strive to maximize their
payoffs in the game. When examining the games that are already set up,
it is assumed, on your behalf, that the payouts list include the sum of
all payoffs associated with that outcome. This will exclude any \"what
if\" questions that may arise. The number of players in a game can
theoretically be infinite, but most games will be put into the context
of two players. One of the simplest games is a sequential game involving
two players.

Solving Sequential Games Using Backward Induction:

![](.//media/image1.png){width="3.65625in"
height="2.102777777777778in"}In the section below is a simple sequential
game between two players. The labels with Player 1 and Player 2 within
them are the information sets for players one and two, respectively. The
numbers in the parentheses at the bottom of the tree are the payoffs at
each respective point. The game is also sequential, so Player 1 makes
the first decision(left or right) and Player 2 makes its decision after
Player 1(up or down).

![](.//media/image2.png){width="3.6875in" height="2.3125in"}Backward
induction, like all game theory, uses the assumptions of rationality and
maximization, meaning that Player 2 will maximize his payoff in any
given situation. At either information set, we have two choices, four in
all. By eliminating the choices that Player 2 will not choose, we can
narrow down our tree. In this way, we will bold the lines that maximize
the player\'s payoff at the given information set.

![](.//media/image3.png){width="3.6770833333333335in"
height="2.109722222222222in"}After this reduction, Player 1 can maximize
its payoffs now that Player 2\'s choices are made known. The result is
an equilibrium found by backward induction of Player 1 choosing
\"right\" and Player 2 choosing \"up.\" Below is the solution to the
game with the equilibrium bold path.

![](.//media/image4.png){width="3.6458333333333335in"
height="2.4166666666666665in"}

For example, one could easily set up a game similar to the one above
using companies as the players. This game could include product release
scenarios. If Company 1 wanted to release a product, what might Company
2 do in response? Will Company 2 release a similar competing product? By
forecasting sales of this new product in different scenarios, we can set
up a game to predict how events might unfold. Below is an example of how
one might model such a game.

The Bottom Line

By using simple methods of game theory, we can solve what would be a
confusing array of outcomes in a real-world situation. Using game theory
as a tool for financial analysis can be very helpful in sorting out
potentially messy real-world situations, from mergers to product
releases.

Reference:
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/financial-theory/08/game-theory-basics.asp
